**Microclimatic fluctuation throughout the day influences subtropical butterfly assemblages between the canopy and understory** 

*Manuscript accepted in Diversity (ISSN 1424-2818) on 14 April 2023*

Vertical biodiversity stratification is a recognized pattern in tropical forests; however, biotic and abiotic factors driving this pattern for butterflies are little explored analytically. We investigated the influence of fluctuation in daily climatic conditions in the vertical stratification for alpha and beta diversity of fruit-feeding butterflies in a subtropical forest. We sampled fruit-feeding butterflies with bait traps in two summer periods in the understory and canopy of the Atlantic Forest in southern Brazil. A total of 1,347 individuals belonging to 38 fruit-feeding butterfly species were recorded. The canopy and the understory were distinct concerning microclimatic conditions, leading to different responses from butterfly assemblages. Richness did not differ between strata or was affected by the environmental condition. However, we observed an effect of stratum in interaction whit variation in microclimatic conditions, in which the canopy showed a greater increase in abundance than the understory as the variation in climatic conditions increased. Temperature homogenization at night, which is determined by the macroclimatic condition, can impose a barrier to vertical stratification in richness, while microclimatic variation is relevant to define species abundance between strata because it acts on population dynamics. The total beta diversity was affected by strata, and dissimilarities were greater among understory sites than among canopy sites. Further, we did not observe an effect of microclimatic variables or strata in beta partitioning components, indicating that variables in broader scales may define these processes. Besides the difference in composition, our study shows that the understory is represented mainly by species from the Satyrinae family, while the canopy presents species from different clades. These findings help us to better understand the mechanisms that generate distinct patterns of vertical stratification of the fruit-feeding butterflies in subtropical forests in the Neotropics and provide new insights into the role of microclimatic conditions in the structuring of insect assemblages. 
